README.md, before:

# Black Hole RL Project

This project implements the **Black Hole** board game (refer to `RULES.md`) as a Reinforcement Learning environment using **Gymnasium**, calculates strategies using **Self-Play DQN**, and includes a **Pygame** interface to play against the trained AI.

## 📂 Project Structure

- **`black_hole/`**: The Python package for the game environment.
  - `game.py`: Core game logic (Board representation, Move validation, Scoring).
  - `env.py`: Gymnasium wrapper implementing the standard RL API.
  - `wrappers.py`: `SelfPlayWrapper` that handles the opponent's moves automatically.
  - `model.py`: **Shared Model Architecture**. Contains the `QNetwork` (ResNet-18 + Sinusoidal Embeddings) and helper functions (`preprocess_obs`, `get_action_mask`) used by all scripts.
- **`train_dqn_vector.py`**: **(Recommended if GPU)** The high-performance vectorized training script using `gym.vector.SyncVectorEnv` to run 128+ games in parallel.
- **`train_dqn.py`**: The original single-threaded training script (reference/debugging).
- **`blackhole_test.py`**: Pygame script to play against the AI graphically.
- **`verify_env.py`**: Simple script to verify the Gym environment standard compliance.

## 🚀 Setup

1.  **Environment**:
    ```powershell
    conda activate IRL_env
    ```
2.  **Install Dependencies**:
    ```powershell
    pip install gymnasium numpy torch matplotlib pygame
    ```
3.  **Install the Game Package** (Run from project root):
    ```powershell
    pip install -e .
    ```

## 🧠 Training the AI

The agent learns via **Self-Play**. It plays against a previous version of itself ("Opponent"). When the agent's win rate against the opponent exceeds `75%` **for 3 consecutive evaluations**, the opponent is promoted to the current agent's level. This ensures the new agent is consistently better, not just lucky.

### Option 1: Vectorized Training (Fastest) -> **Recommended**
Runs multiple environments in parallel to maximize GPU utilization.
```powershell
python train_dqn_vector.py
```
**Key Hyperparameters**:
- `NUM_ENVS`: Number of parallel games (Default: 512).
- `BATCH_SIZE`: Training batch size (Default: 2048).
- `NUM_CYCLIC_DECAY_CYCLES`: Number of times Epsilon resets (Cyclic Decay).

### Option 2: Single-Threaded Training
Good for debugging or understanding the flow.(use if no gpu)
```powershell
python train_dqn.py
```

### Training Output
Artifacts are saved in `trained_models/BlackHole_DQN_v{X}/`:
- `model.pth`: The trained model weights + config.
- `checkpoint.pth`: Periodic checkpoint (resumable).
- `training_plot.png`: A plot showing **Average Reward** and **Win Rate** over time.
- `training_log.txt`: Hyperparameters and final stats.

## 🎮 Playing Against the AI

Once you have a trained model, test your skills against it! The script automatically finds the latest model in `trained_models/`.

**Run with latest model**:
```powershell
python blackhole_test.py
```

**Run with specific model**:
```powershell
python blackhole_test.py --model "trained_models/BlackHole_DQN_v1/model.pth"
```

### Game Controls
- **You are Player 1 (Red)**.
- **AI is Player 2 (Green)**.
- **Click** on any valid circle to place your tile.
- The game automatically handles the AI's turn.

## 🤖 Model Architecture (ResNet-18)

The model logic is centralized in `black_hole/model.py`.
- **Input**: 6x6x2 Grid (Plane 1 = Player 1, Plane 2 = Player 2).
- **Backbone**: **ResNet-18** style CNN blocks (32 -> 64 -> 128 -> 256 channels).
- **Time/Turn Encoding**: **Sinusoidal Embeddings** (Transformer-style) injected into the dense layer to tell the agent "how late" in the game it is.
- **Output**: 21 logits corresponding to board positions, masked for validity.

This architecture captures spatial relationships on the board much better than standard MLPs.

Commit message:

Add continual training from last checkpoint + using pretrained model. ADD selectable player sides, AI vs AI toggle, multiple headless games in ai vs ai. + updated the readme.

README.md, after:

# Black Hole RL Project

This project implements the **Black Hole** board game (refer to `RULES.md`) as a Reinforcement Learning environment using **Gymnasium**, calculates strategies using **Self-Play DQN**, and includes a **Pygame** interface to play against the trained AI.

## 📂 Project Structure

- **`black_hole/`**: The Python package for the game environment.
  - `game.py`: Core game logic (Board representation, Move validation, Scoring).
  - `env.py`: Gymnasium wrapper implementing the standard RL API.
  - `wrappers.py`: `SelfPlayWrapper` that handles the opponent's moves automatically.
  - `model.py`: **Shared Model Architecture**. Contains the `QNetwork` (ResNet-18 + Sinusoidal Embeddings) and helper functions (`preprocess_obs`, `get_action_mask`) used by all scripts.
- **`train_dqn_vector.py`**: **(Recommended if GPU)** The high-performance vectorized training script using `gym.vector.SyncVectorEnv` to run 128+ games in parallel.
- **`train_dqn.py`**: The original single-threaded training script (reference/debugging).
- **`blackhole_test.py`**: Pygame script to play against the AI graphically.
- **`verify_env.py`**: Simple script to verify the Gym environment standard compliance.

## 🚀 Setup

1.  **Environment**:
    ```powershell
    conda activate IRL_env
    ```
2.  **Install Dependencies**:
    ```powershell
    pip install gymnasium numpy torch matplotlib pygame
    ```
3.  **Install the Game Package** (Run from project root):
    ```powershell
    pip install -e .
    ```

## 🧠 Training the AI

The agent learns via **Self-Play**. It plays against a previous version of itself ("Opponent"). When the agent's win rate against the opponent exceeds `75%` **for 3 consecutive evaluations**, the opponent is promoted to the current agent's level. This ensures the new agent is consistently better, not just lucky.

### Option 1: Vectorized Training (Fastest) -> **Recommended**
Runs multiple environments in parallel to maximize GPU utilization.
```powershell
python train_dqn_vector.py
```
**Options**:
- `--resume "path/to/checkpoint.pth"`: Resume training from a saved state (restore episode & weights).
- `--load "path/to/model.pth"`: Start fresh training (Experiment 0) but initialized with trained weights (Fine-Tuning).

**Key Hyperparameters**:
- `NUM_ENVS`: Number of parallel games (Default: 512).
- `BATCH_SIZE`: Training batch size (Default: 2048).
- `NUM_CYCLIC_DECAY_CYCLES`: Number of times Epsilon resets (Cyclic Decay).

### Option 2: Single-Threaded Training
Good for debugging or understanding the flow.(use if no gpu)
```powershell
python train_dqn.py
```

### Training Output
Artifacts are saved in `trained_models/BlackHole_DQN_v{X}/`:
- `model.pth`: The trained model weights + config.
- `checkpoint.pth`: Periodic checkpoint (resumable).
- `training_plot.png`: A plot showing **Average Reward** and **Win Rate** over time.
- `training_log.txt`: Hyperparameters and final stats.

## 🎮 Playing Against the AI

Once you have a trained model, you can play against it, watch two models fight, or run simulations.

### 1. You vs AI (Interactive)
The script automatically loads the latest model. By default, you are Player 1.
```powershell
python blackhole_test.py
```
**Options**:
- `--model "path/to/model.pth"`: Play against a specific model.
- `--player 2`: Play as Player 2 (Green) instead of Player 1 (Red).

### 2. AI vs AI (Watch Mode)
Watch two models battle it out.
```powershell
python blackhole_test.py --p1 "model_A.pth" --p2 "model_B.pth"
```

### 3. Headless Simulation (Benchmarking)
Quickly simulate 100 games between two models without graphics to get win rates.
```powershell
python blackhole_test.py --sim --p1 "model_A.pth" --p2 "model_B.pth" --num-games 100
```

### Game Controls
- **You are Player 1 (Red)** or **Player 2 (Green)**.
- **Click** on any valid circle to place your tile.
- The game automatically handles the AI's turn (with 0.3s delay).
- The game automatically handles the AI's turn.

## 🤖 Model Architecture (ResNet-18)

The model logic is centralized in `black_hole/model.py`.
- **Input**: 6x6x2 Grid (Plane 1 = Player 1, Plane 2 = Player 2).
- **Backbone**: **ResNet-18** style CNN blocks (32 -> 64 -> 128 -> 256 channels).
- **Time/Turn Encoding**: **Sinusoidal Embeddings** (Transformer-style) injected into the dense layer to tell the agent "how late" in the game it is.
- **Output**: 21 logits corresponding to board positions, masked for validity.

This architecture captures spatial relationships on the board much better than standard MLPs.
